# Patterns languages workshops  

Objectives constraints Ressources Action timeline   

First, it appears that we had been making too much of the technical definition of "what is a pattern?" at the onset of the workshops. For that reason we began to structure the workshops more along the lines of a language immersion, hands-on approach than logical step-by-step explanation. Once people begin to work with the pattern cards, the concrete issues/opportunities in the area under focus somehow begin to make sense, in all their rich complexity, still a daunting challenge, but no longer a paralyzing conundrum. **Recognizing patterns at work and in context was far more immediately intuitive and useful than defining "pattern" in the abstract.**  

Second, even using a representative stack of cards (well short of the full 136 patterns) provided enough of a sense of the whole to significantly broaden a team's perspective on its selected scenario. **The deck to a certain extent helped to address the natural limitations of "whoever happens to show up" by providing a framework of experience beyond the specific composition of any given team.**  Third, working with clusters of patterns in the context of a whole scenario appeared to reduce the temptation to view individual patterns as "best practices" (that is, in the sense of "prefab" solutions — a distinction that merits extended discussion in another venue) while reinforcing creative ideas for the form and content of a communication strategy/tactic shaped by the influence of multiple patterns. Fourth, the level of energy, creativity and enthusiasm we witnessed in virtually every team convinced us that the application of a pattern language approach is intrinsically social, participatory and collaborative. That is, it can't happen by having any one person independently, off on their own, determining which patterns to apply and how. The collective insights and experiences of a team (optimally around 4-5 people) are required to ground and validate the selection of patterns as well as to sort out the implications of the pattern selection. Fifth, and perhaps most important of all, the exercises appeared to generate cohesive narratives (yes, The Power of Story, LV pattern 114) around the issues and opportunities in any given scenarios, seamlessly drawing upon the specific experience, creativity and imagination of the team. The pattern cards stimulated and guided, but did not limit, the conversations, producing an action-oriented story of how the issues in the situation could be resolved without arbitrarily truncating or compromising their complexity. Sixth, multiple ways can be developed for extracting learnings from any specific workshop to enrich the development of the overall Liberating Voices framework. The Public Thinking and Public Health program, for example, conducted a subsequent session in which new patterns were written and uploaded into the online Liberating Voices pattern repository, and the admittedly quick-and-dirty reports that the convener generated simply suggest directions worth considering. Whatever the structure or method, closing this loop reinforces the value of the local workshops in concretely extending
