# PATTERN LANGUAGES STRUCTURAL COHERENCE

A pattern is an encapsulation of forces; a general solution to a problem. The 'language' combines the nodes into an organizational framework. A loose collection of patterns is not a system, because it lacks connections. The rules by which the patterns (nodes) connect are just as important as the patterns themselves. Words without connection rules cannot make up a language. A coherent combination of patterns will form a new, higher-level pattern that possesses additional properties [Fig. 16]. Not only does each original pattern work in combination as well as it did individually, but the whole contains organizational information that is not present in any of its constituent patterns. A higher-level pattern cannot be predicted from the lower-level patterns alone. Sticking patterns together without proper ordering will not provide an overall coherence. Each component might work individually, but the whole does not work, precisely because it is not a whole. A pattern language is more than just a patterns catalogue. Individual patterns are easier to describe than their language, yet a catalogue is only a dictionary. It does not give a script; it has no rules for flow, internal connections, or ordered substructures. A patterns catalogue lacks the essential validation that comes from recognizing the combinatorial properties in the language. Some patterns will require other complementary patterns for completeness, and the allowed combinations are usually infinite. A language tells you which of them can be combined, and in what manner, in order to create a higher-level pattern. Drawing an analogy with biological systems, the system works because of the connections between subsystems (Passioura, 1979)-  

As the ensemble of patterns evolves a cooperative structure, driven by the alignment of patterns (or anti-patterns) on different levels, it creates unexpected similarities.
Thus, each level of a coherent structure expresses a property that is characteristic of the WHOLE.
