Urban forces, entropy

## The strength and range of urban forces

An excursion into physics helps to understand the nature of urban couplings on different scales (Rule 4). Every force f arises from differences in some field U , which represents either a geometrical quality, or a function. It is easy to see where U becomes greater through concentration or intensity. The force f is defined as the negative spatial derivative of the potential energy U of its field, f = -dU/dr . (For readers who don't know calculus, the force can be thought of as a ratio: the difference in potential U divided by the distance dr over which the potential difference is measured). This equation gives a stronger force where the difference in potential is larger. A difference in potential translates into the urban context as a difference in qualities within a short distance; implying a stronger coupling force whenever there is greater contrast in qualities such as texture, color, or curvature of the interface (Rules 1 and 2).

We will now use the above formula to explain two pathologies of twentieth-century urbanism: (1) the lack of coherence inside zoned regions; and (2) the dysfunctional edges of vertically-concentrated functions. The potential U is the same throughout a homogeneous region, so without differentiations, there can be no cohesive forces to hold the region together. This implies that internal contrast -- i.e., complexity -- is needed within any urban region. Zoning into segregated functions and an obsession with a minimalist design style thus rule out urban coherence. A second application of this formula shows why we need connective urban interfaces. Vertical concentration of a function U in monofunctional megatowers creates enormous functional stresses at the building's edge. This occurs because of the tremendous jump in U at an abrupt boundary (representing a very small width dr ).

We will now use the above formula to explain two pathologies of twentieth-century urbanism: (1) the lack of coherence inside zoned regions; and (2) the dysfunctional edges of vertically-concentrated functions. The potential U is the same throughout a homogeneous region, so without differentiations, there can be no cohesive forces to hold the region together. This implies that internal contrast -- i.e., complexity -- is needed within any urban region. Zoning into segregated functions and an obsession with a minimalist design style thus rule out urban coherence. A second application of this formula shows why we need connective urban interfaces. Vertical concentration of a function U in monofunctional megatowers creates enormous functional stresses at the building's edge. This occurs because of the tremendous jump in U at an abrupt boundary (representing a very small width dr ).

Even in an artificial complex system such as the urban fabric, it is impossible to violate the inverse proportionality between force intensity and range. Juxtaposing large contrasting units generates unnatural forces on the large scale, which overwhelm both the short-range coupling forces, and the weaker long-range alignment forces necessary for urban coherence. Le Corbusier attempted to reverse the intensity and range of urban forces (Rule 4). He conjectured -- incorrectly, and without any scientific evidence -- that this radical re-organization would solve the problems facing nineteenth-century cities in the twentieth century. He never realized that such a reversal was physically impossible, and only succeeded in dissolving the structural interactions between urban units.


## Entropy and spatial organization

Coupling established on the small scale via local short-range forces does not necessarily lead to coherence on the large scale. The system needs to create its large scale according to certain ordering principles. Long-range alignment forces differ from the short-range coupling forces discussed in the earlier sections. "Large-scale order occurs when every element relates to every other element at a distance in a way that reduces the entropy" (Salingaros, 1995). 


Entropy is a concept from physics that measures the degree of disorder. A box of wooden matches scattered randomly on the floor gives a pattern with high visual entropy. The entropy is reduced by carefully aligning the matches into a more regular configuration. It does not have to be a rectangular pattern, but could look like a spider web or a whorl. Mathematical symmetries -- in this case translational, rotational, radial, or spiral -- create large-scale ordering, which lowers the visual entropy.

Another example is to rearrange sticks of different lengths and colors that were initially in a random distribution. Of the infinite possible patterns obtainable, the most unimaginative is one that separates the sticks into neat rows having the same color and same length. By concentrating similar elements together (the foundation for post-war zoning) there can be no short-range couplings on the lowest scale, because there is no contrast. Entropy has been lowered, but by eliminating the smaller scales altogether. This violates Rules 6 and 7. Regardless of any deceptively tidy arrangement, such an ensemble can never achieve coherence because it doesn't have enough complexity.

The principle behind urban organization is that alignment forces are long-range, and are weaker than coupling forces, which are short-range (Rule 4). Alignment must therefore respect each individual module, and not change its internal structure by undoing the couplings between elements. To reduce the entropy (disorder) in an urban setting, an optimum number of long-range connections must be established between all the different modules (Rule 5). There exist distinct levels of scale on which this is achieved (Rule 6). Different types of connections are created according to their generative processes, but not through a simplistic visual pattern. Human activities do not depend on visual symmetry in the plan, which is geometrical order that is not directly perceived on the ground. Urban environments that are strongly connected (hence very successful) usually look irregular from the air (Gehl, 1987).

The geometry of built form as revealed by the natural uncontrolled growth of cities is fractal and not random (Makse, Havlin et al., 1995). This makes a world of difference: urban evolution is a connective process on all scales; the opposite of what a random process would be. Ordering imposed by planning tries to counteract this mistaken notion of "random" growth (Batty and Longley, 1994). Most successful urban regions tend to be more "nearly ordered" rather than "nearly disordered" (Hillier, 1999). Approximate linearization is a consequence of human movement, and leads to one form of clear urban ordering. This does not imply perfectly straight or parallel lines, but rather a relaxed linearization of urban form induced by the path structure. Regardless of the approximately linear ordering forces due to the transportation network, a city can never be aligned completely without losing its geometrical coherence.

## Reducing entropy does not generate local connections

Rectangular grid alignment is a useful entropy-lowering technique for urban complexity created by uneven topography, as for example in hill-towns such as Priene and San Francisco; i.e., too much variation in the ground level (the z-axis) can be countered by a straight x-y grid. This is confused with, and has replaced older techniques for generating strong couplings on the small scale. We are now obsessed with lining up objects, even though a straight-line interface prevents most geometric couplings. (Using the friction analogy introduced earlier, smooth, perfectly straight interfaces don't couple with each other). Figures 8, 9, and 10 illustrate three distinct cases of ordering. In Figure 8, non-interacting elements are aligned, just as in a contemporary city. The opposite case, where interacting elements show no overall alignment, has a decidedly organic form (Figure 9). Human dynamics linearize a city so that its plan is much more aligned than Figure 9 (Hillier, 1999).


